Between New Zealand and India.
We are hearing first of all from the New Zealand Council of Trade
Unions,
Rachel McIntosh.
Excellent. We'll hand over to you.
We have 10 minutes set down for your hearing today.
I'm sure you've done this before. You're welcome to leave time for
questions within that. Thank you.
Kia ora, Tim. Tena tatou ko Rachel McIntosh toku
ingoa. I'm the vice president of the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, Te
Kawai Kaimahi. We represent the interests of our 32
affiliated trade unions and more than 370,000
working people across the country.
Appreciate the opportunity to submit on the treaty
examination of the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement.
So the CTU approach on trade agreements is to identify possible
risks to the New Zealand economy, to employment and workers' rights, both
here and overseas, and to local businesses, while also recognizing the
advantages some sectors may gain from better access to foreign markets.
So we're living in a turbulent time, and New
Zealand has a reasonably concentrated trade portfolio with
relatively few trading partners.
So it is sensible to diversify our trade
relationships where possible, and trade agreements can be a useful
mechanism for achieving this.
But trade agreements must be well-designed, and the New Zealand public must have
adequate time and information to possibly consult on the development
and ratification of any agreement.
We have major concerns about this free trade agreement
on both fronts. So the two central concerns we'll speak to
today are the inadequate labor provisions in the agreement
and the unacceptably short timeframe for treaty examination.
So for these reasons, we cannot support this deal.
And I'm now going to hand over to Jack Foster, my colleague, who will make some
further detailed comments on these issues. Jack.
Kia ora. Thank you, Rachel, and thank you,
Chair. Apologies, I had slight technical difficulties.
So yeah, I'll just
expand on those two points as Rachel mentioned.
So first of all, labor rights are unavailable to many workers in India, and
there are an estimated 11 million people living in conditions of modern
slavery in that country. So that includes forced labor and forced
commercial sexual exploitation.
So given these major labor rights problems in
India, the CTU would expect a trade agreement with that country to
contain a strong and enforceable labor chapter that would commit India
to materially improving its labor standards and protections.
This is necessary to protect New Zealand against the risk that it will import
goods made in India in exploitative conditions, and it's also necessary to
protect Kiwi companies from being put at an unfair commercial
disadvantage due to the lower labor costs that businesses located
in India can rely on.
So unfortunately, the trade and sustainable development chapter in this agreement
uses largely non-binding language and is not covered by the
dispute settlement chapter anyway, which makes it unenforceable.
So it will do little, if anything, to support labor standards and
protections.
So the CTU cannot support an agreement with such a weak labor chapter, and in our
written submission, we set out areas that we expect a modern trade
agreement should cover with respect to labor rights and protections.
So our second major concern is the inadequate timeframe for the treaty
examination process. So the secrecy of trade negotiations
has been a longstanding problem in New Zealand that the CTU's often commented on.
The standard practice is that the text of an FTA is generally not made
available for public comment until after it has been signed.
And this makes genuine public consultation quite difficult, as by the time an
agreement is signed, it already has lots of political momentum.
This process was replicated in the negotiation of the NZ India FTA,
but the negotiations were even more secretive than usual, with the CTU and
other civil society organizations not even allowed to view and
comment on draft text in confidence, which we've done in the
past with multiple trade agreements.
We understand the secrecy was at the request of the Indian government.
Nevertheless, given that the whole process has been behind closed doors
in which to review and make submissions to the select committee on this
agreement.
This timeframe seems to be driven by electoral calculations rather than good
governance. So the length of the consultation material alone justifies a
far longer consultation period. If we exclude tariff lines, the text
of the agreement runs to 569 pages.
Then there's an additional seven side letters, and then the national
interest
for the public in three weeks.
But more important than the level of material to examine, this is an agreement that
will sign New Zealand up to binding obligations
for decades. Reasonable people will disagree over whether some of these
obligations are in the national interest, and this needs to be openly debated.
But this
remarks there, but in our written submission, we also outlined concerns we
have regarding the commitment that New Zealand will promote foreign direct
investment with the aim of increasing such investment to $20
billion U.S.,
and also concerns regarding the productivity action plans that have been
agreed for numerous horticulture exports.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak about this agreement, and we reiterate that we
cannot support the agreement due to the weak labor provisions it
contains, and we also request that the consultation period on this treaty is
significantly extended to enable proper public debate about its
pros and cons. Thank you.
All right. Thank you for taking time to share your views this morning.
First question from Tim Costley
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
you've both commented on the timeframe.
I assume you're both aware that that's sort of set down in law that every
treaty gets the exact same period of time, the EU
free trade agreement.
And the second thing, I'll just give it to you now so you can comment on both.
So, I mean, the timeframe isn't in question.
What's your alternative, that we should just not approve the agreement?
Obviously, you're speaking in opposition to it.
Is that going to help your members if we miss out on at least $1 billion
extra coming into our economy, creating more jobs, creating better-paying jobs?
You'd rather just not see that at all. Is that what you're saying?
You think nothing is a better
outcome?
Thank you. Sorry,
you cut out briefly in the middle of your second question, but to the first
question, I would say that the timeframe is just inadequate, so that needs to be
addressed.
Yeah, but that's not been addressed.
So to this agreement-
It's been set down in law.
Yeah, I think it's actually your internet connection.
Most of what you said was cutting out. Rachel's been really good.
So the timeframe isn't something that this committee can control.
Um-
But what's your alternative, that we just don't bother trading with
India? That we don't try and grow the money coming into this
job to create better-paying jobs
and more jobs for the kind of people that your union is meant to represent?
Yeah, sorry, my internet connection has been
faulty. Yeah, so we would say that, first of all, the economic
benefits of the agreement are very modest, so it's important to bear that in mind.
Yeah, they said that 20 years ago about China, and clearly it's not true.
Yeah, well, time will tell. But we also have the
economic
benefits of the agreement are also contingent on New Zealand making good on the FDI
commitments, which
seem very fanciful in our view.
There's no automatic link between reducing tariff lines and
better jobs becoming available. It depends on
what industries get grown. It depends on
what domestic decisions New Zealand makes to support the growth of good
jobs. So the kind of idea that you just reduce
trade barriers and that is
good for everyone is not supported by the statistics.
It tends to benefit,
flows down to benefits for wider New Zealand workers is a totally different
question, and we haven't seen that necessarily happen with
trade agreements in the past.
Okay, look, we're over time, so we'll have to jump to our next submitter now, but
thank you very much for your time this morning.
Next up, we have Chris Newman.
Right. We see you've joined now,
Mr. Newman.
Up my video.
There we go. Excellent. Thank you very much.
Have I got-
We have five minutes set down for you this morning
... control there?
We'll hand straight over to you. Thank you.
Yep. Okay. Chris Newman. I have professional
qualifications in education. I have a degree in sociology.
I've lived overseas 25 years of my life.
I've been married to an Asian woman for 27 years and have two
East-West children,
so I'm qualified to speak from the front lines of living.
I've also lived in India. We have many concerns on the
social level. We can argue economics all day,
but the problem we're having in the city here
is
people are coming from foreign countries and replicating all the
downside of their culture and their traditions and their behavior,
which is not compatible with or friendly to
our way, and we are the host community.
MPs are meant to protect us. Their first
job for an MP is to protect the nation.
We are not being protected against people who come here with values that are
hostile and inimical to us, many of whom have
submitted fraudulent documents to get into the country,
and the laws are not being applied to them.
We have the example, for example, of 460 Sikh truck
drivers who produced forged documents to get into
New Zealand, and they were never returned home even though they violated our
Crimes Act.
All this business was sold to the New Zealand public as if we were going to be
bringing in high-skilled individuals like rocket scientists and
brain surgeons, and instead we've got people running pizza parlors,
Uber drivers,
checkout ladies. All the local people are being pushed out of
employment. My son, who's a university student, can no longer
find easy access to
part-time employment during the holidays because all that work's been soaked up by
cheap immigrant labor. The Indian people who are
brought here are also being exploited by their fellows, as
they are exploited in India, which is what I saw boldly when I
lived there. And there is no doubt that there are now sufficient
number of Indians in New Zealand, 350,000 plus,
5.8% of our population, to run their own rackets
and systems in a parallel society to ours, and
the MPs are going to tell us-... how much money we're going to make.
No one's done any work on the black economy, how much tax is not
being paid. What's the social cost to us from having
people turning up in hospital who've been intergenerational cousin
marriages for centuries, and their birth rates are
producing children with birth defects, and we are
expected to carry all the downsides socially of this.
What happens when there is an economic downturn and all these
immigrants who are not rocket scientists or brain
surgeons, who are simple people, end up on the unemployment roll,
burdening our social welfare system?
Also, our infrastructure is stretched to breaking point in
Auckland. There's huge traffic lines of people trying to drive
into the city. Bringing mass migration has flooded and
overloaded the infrastructure that I paid for, my parents,
my grandparents paid for, for us, and the immigrants
are getting full benefit of all of our systems without ever
contributing to the building up of what we've got, let
alone about the having to rebuild them to
cope with the mass overload.
So we are facing also a demographic genocide over the
long term with the open door through these agreements.
We know they're never honored in terms of protecting us.
It's the new group coming in. The laws don't apply to them,
only to us. So they break our DEI laws.
You can go around Indian businesses, and you'll see only Indian
employees. What on earth are they doing here?
Why have we got Indian immigrant real estate agents?
This long list of people coming here from this
particular deal in this country is just an insult
to us. We were never asked if
we wanted any of this stuff before it was even proposed, and
it's being presented to us like a done deal.
We don't want it. The New Zealand people don't want this invasion.
We don't want uncontrollable colonization from,
for example, Islam has many, many points which violate
our active classification.
Right, Mr. Noon, we've come to the end of the time set down for you this morning,
but appreciate your insights.
And this is being put through with no challenge at all. Okay, I'm finished.
All right.
Thank you.
Okay, we come now to Jim Capo.
Good morning, Mr. Capo.
I see you've joined us there. You might like to unmute your
microphone and turn on your video, and then we'll be away. Excellent.
Oh, yep. Sorry about that.
Good to see you. Thank you.
Yep.
I'm sure you're aware how the process works. We have five minutes set down.
I'll hand straight to you.
Yes, thank you very much. Appreciate being given the opportunity to speak this
morning. In my
submission, I did mention that I'm an immigrant to New Zealand.
You can tell from my
accent. I've been here 16 years and proud citizen.
I like to present my New Zealand passport wherever I travel around the world.
I wanted to submit this,
basically speak against the
acceptance of the current
free trade agreement, which I note in the presentation, this is
actually called an examination of the...
It's an international treaty examination.
So I feel like this should be marketed as a treaty, not
a straight trade agreement. There's a lot in this that's really more around a
treaty. I do agree with a lot of what was just said by the
NZCTU.
They were asked the question about the timeline being
restricted by law, and I think the correct answer would be then
to reject the current agreement that was negotiated in secret,
have everybody a chance to review it, revise the sections
that are in debate or discussion, and resubmit.
That would be the correct process that I would submit.
One of the reasons I wanted to present was because when I was in the United States,
I was involved in several grassroots efforts to block some of
what were called free trade agreements in the United States.
One of those was the Central American Free Trade Agreement.
That was a similar situation where the government was trying to say, "Look,
we're doing this under fast track. There's rules.
We have to vote on it within a certain amount of time." There was
grassroots resistance they didn't expect. The time was running out.
The government was starting to worry.
They brought in the ambassadors of the five Central American nations to
do a roadshow around the country. And, I was at the
first
presentation they gave.
And they weren't very well prepared.
They allowed the
audience to ask whatever questions they wanted, and they got questions they didn't
really want to answer. And
it didn't work out for them in the end.
But afterwards, there was a nice little meet and greet and
over a couple of drinks and
snacks, we were able to talk to the ambassadors, and I had a direct
conversation with the Ambassador of Costa Rica,
to the
United States of Costa Rica. And he said that the reason Costa
Rica wanted to sign this deal with the United States is they had a similar
negotiation going on with the European Union, but the European
Union wanted the Central American countries to
give up their sovereignty before they had an economic
agreement. And the United States was offering some economic
benefits, direct benefits, in exchange for the
ceding of sovereignty of the Central American nations into this
global framework of a treaty. So I guess my
question to thePanel and the people that are going to be voting on this
would be what guarant-- This is a treaty.
New Zealand is giving up certain authority to negotiate, uh,
in the future. So, what concrete
benefits are we getting in giving up this authority?
And if those benefits aren't concrete and well understood by the
public, this treaty should be rejected as is,
renegotiated, and resubmitted. That's basically my position.
All right. Thank you very much for your time.
We've got time for a quick question for Mr. Capo, if anyone has one.
Otherwise, we'll move to our next submitter.
All right. Thank you very much for speaking to your submission this morning.
Appreciate it.
Okay, next up, we have Gary Judd AC.
Excellent. All right.
Looks like he's just joined us.
Good morning, Mr. Judd. Can you hear us?
Just need to bring up your camera and turn off your
mute.
Ah, perfect. There we go. All right.
Good morning. Welcome along to the committee this morning.
We've received your submission. We have five minutes set down, and we'll hand
straight over to you. Thank you.
Unfortunately, we can't hear you at the moment.
Okay, he appears to have dropped out.
Let me just see if we can get him back in.
Okay,
we'll give Mr. Judd a moment to come back in if
he can.
Okay.
He doesn't appear to be.
All right, we'll move straight to William Fitzgerald then, our next submitter.
Thank you.
Okay. Can you all see and hear me?
Yes, we can. Thank you.
Okay.
All right. Slight hiccup with the previous submitter there, but, uh, we'll jump
straight to you, Mr. Fitzgerald. We have five minutes set down, and I'll let you
crack into it. Thanks.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the committee.
Because speaking time is limited, I will focus today on the migration and labor
market provisions of the India/New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
I speak as a New Zealand citizen and domestic mathematics major approaching
graduation, so I have a direct interest in technical employment in New
Zealand.
The FTA includes temporary employment entry, working holiday and student
placements, along with post-study work-related pathways.
In fact, it's described the equivalent of 1,667
three-year temporary employment entry visas per year, capped at
5,000 at any one time, as well as up to 1,000 working holiday
places per year.
Immigration into New Zealand is already high relative to the size of our existing
population. Stats NZ recorded a net gain of
54,200 non-New Zealand citizens in the December
2025 year. Against a population of about
5.34 million, that is equivalent to adding the population of a small
city to our country in a single year.
The FTA may not directly create residence or family reunification rights,
but if it does not explicitly prevent later transitions into other visa
categories, then temporary entry, post-study work, and
employment access may still interact with employer sponsorship,
residence pathways, and family reunification settings, creating
a risk of increasing long-term immigration from India overall.
New Zealand's labor market is already weak.
In particular, while there are shortages of senior software engineers,
cybersecurity specialists, or experienced systems architects,
there is no domestic shortage of entry-level IT workers or recent technical
graduates. Yet the FTA expands post-study and employment
pathways for Indian graduates of New Zealand institutions.
This reduces opportunities for citizen graduates who are trying to begin our
careers, and it does not address the technology sector's actual skills
shortages. There is also a sovereignty problem.
If these were ordinary visa settings, a future government could abolish them
through normal domestic processes.
But once migration access is placed inside a bilateral trade agreement,
any later restriction becomes diplomatically and legally more complicated.
My position is not that New Zealand should not trade with India.
It is that trade policy should not be used as a vehicle for migration policy.
If Parliament wishes to expand migration pathways, it should do so through domestic
law and seek explicit democratic consent.
I therefore oppose ratification of the India/New Zealand FTA in its present
form. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for your submission this morning.
Have we got questions for Mr.
Fitzgerald?
All right. Thank you very much for coming on this morning, William.
Appreciate your time.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. We'll jump back to, um, Mr. Judd.
I believe he is back online.
Hopefully, we're able to hear from him this time.
Hello?
Yes. Good morning. We can hear you this time.
Yes. Good.
Okay, thank you.
I am a great supporter of free trade
agreementsHowever, problem with this
one is
its affirmation of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People, UNDRIP.
It also affirms New Zealand's position on
UNDRIP. In legal language,
affirmation signals acceptance of a commitment.
Earlier free trade agreements did not do that.
They simply said that
UNDRIP and New Zealand's
position on UNDRIP was noted.
It isn't
domestic law unless Parliament incorporates it,
but courts can still use treaties when
interpreting legislation and in other
decision-making. Now that matters here.
Justice Susan Glazebrook has written that UNDRIP is becoming
increasingly embedded in New Zealand's legal
framework.
Despite that, affirmation in
this FTA still matters. It strengthens
and legitimizes that movement.
In July 2023, New Zealand's
representatives at the UN
told that body that New Zealand is committed to
upholding UNDRIP, and that self-determination
requires indigenous peoples to participate
effectively in decision-making that affects
them. As far as I can see, that is the latest
statement of New Zealand's position.
Since government decisions affect all New Zealanders,
the implication is broad.
In substance, it points towards co-governance,
tribal vetoes, and even tribal rule.
That should be contrasted with New Zealand's earlier position.
In 2007, Helen Clark's government told the United
Nations it could not endorse UNDRIP,
because endorsement would imply special rights,
a veto over democratic decision-making, and different
classes of citizenship.
It said that those outcomes
were incompatible with New Zealand's democratic and constitutional
arrangements.
Te Heuheu
chose those concerns were not fanciful.
Present government did not formally change New Zealand's
position, it simply stopped work on
implementation.
Even that direction has not been obeyed,
because commitment to UNDRIP has been put into the Free
Trade Agreement.
Now, at 9:30, I'm presenting on
behalf
Hobbs Pledge, and I'll then explain how this
problem can be resolved. In the meantime, I'm happy to answer any questions.
Excellent. Do we have any questions for Mr. Judd at this point?
All right. Well, I look forward to hearing from you then again, later
on with the joint submission. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Okay, we move now to Ryan Henderson.
Okay. Is Mr. Henderson
with us?
Okay, just joining in now.
Morning, Mr. Henderson.
Good morning.
Tena koutou, chair and members. My name is Ryan Henderson.
I am an undergraduate economics student at the University of Auckland,
and I have read the full
National Interest Analysis and the commission modeling by the government,
and read large parts of the 1,300-page
text
of this agreement.
Everything I say this morning sits in those documents.
I'm asking the committee to recommend that the House
decline to bring this into agreement
on its current terms and for a minority report to be written.
So starting with what we get. The modeling puts the gain at about
$401 million a year by 2037.
That is 700th of 1% of the economy,
which is less than the government borrows in a fortnight.
Three-quarters of the new exports to India are not new at
all. They are sales redirected from customers we already sell to.
That's diversification dressed up as growth.
And two of our three largest export earners go
backwards. On the same modeling, dairy and services both end up
smaller by 2036 than they would be without the deal.
The money migrants send home was also not counted.
On Australia's numbers, about 32,000 new
arrivals sending money to family
would wipe out the whole
gain.The wins we
are sold also come heavily capped.
Wine under $5 a bottle stays at
150% forever. That is most of our bulk export
Sauvignon Blanc.
Our premium wine still pays 25%
after 10 years of phasing.
On Manuka honey, the headline cut reaches only
the dearest product, a few percent of what we send
abroad. The rest stays at 66%.
Apples and kiwifruit get small seasonal quotas with tariffs that never go
away, and India can suspend those if it judges we have
fallen short of our obligations.
We have done better before. China took our wine to zero by
2012 and opened up for beef. The EU deal,
led by a member of this committee,
did far more on wine, on enforcement, and on climate.
The same trading partner gave us a stronger deal.
Here, beef and dairy are shut out completely.
The heaviest costs fall on workers.
Youth unemployment is 14.4% and climbing.
This deal opens an uncapped channel for Indian students and an
uncapped specialist channel work visa for Indian firms
straight into that labor market, and it strips our power to cap
either of them later. The wage protection meant to cover these workers
doesn't hold, and the government has said so.
The national interest analysis admits in writing that there are,
and I quote, "practical challenges in ensuring compliance with such
obligations, as these workers will be paid by their
home employer in India."
The union saw it coming. E tū says the people coming
in are ripe for exploitation. The maritime
union says it will tell labor in no uncertain terms how
disappointed it is,
and India has not signed the two core conventions on the right to
organize and to bargain. The chapter meant to protect workers
is the one chapter India can never be taken to a panel over.
And then there is the investment. We've promised to push 33
billion
New Zealand dollars into India over 15 years
while we are short of houses and hospitals here.
India promises nothing back, and India alone
decides whether we have delivered.
If it rules we have not, it can claw back access our
exporters have won with no independent umpire.
When our wine growers were asked at this committee how India could pull those
tariffs back, it had no figure for what we are meant to invest.
Right. Thank you, Mr. Henderson. We've come to the end of your time this morning.
We appreciate your insights.
Well done-
Thank you
... on all that reading.
Thank you.
Okay, we come now to Richard Arlidge.
Good morning, Mr. Arlidge.
Just need you to come up on screen. Can see you there,
but not your
video, and you're on mute.
Right. Can you see me-
Right, yes
... and hear me?
We can hear you, but-- and, yes, now we can see you. Okay, over to you.
Thank you.
All right. My name is Richard Arlidge, and thank you for this opportunity to
present to you. Given my time is brief, I'll be terse, and it's
not without some considerable annoyance that I have to spend time pointing out the
obvious and what I, as a taxpayer, pay and mandate others to
do on my behalf. It is to look out for our collective best
interest as a nation of New Zealand.
By way of my background, I was born in New Zealand, and my ancestors on
both sides of my family coincidentally arrived in this country by ship in
1856. I consider myself a law-abiding indigenous
New Zealander, and I've spent my entire working career in matters relating to
real property, its assessment for acquisition and disposal,
mortgage authoriz-authorization, insurance, and more especially
in various forms of its leasehold occupation.
I state here and now that I'm not an expert in free trade agreements.
That said, I've spent my working lifetime perusing legal documents and in their
relationship to property, and so I have more than a modicum of experience with the
law and its documentation than many of my compatriots.
And with my hand firmly on my heart, I can attest to the truth of the saying that
the devil is in the detail.
You've just heard from Gary Judd KC, who having spent a distinguished
lifetime in matters legal by nature in and around courts of law,
he is acutely qualified and aware of how legal matters
might be interpreted by our judiciary, especially one that
appears these days to be rather more comfortable to push the boundaries.
Given his findings, and also those views expressed by Dame Professor Elizabeth
Rata, which I proffer would hit a chord with the majority of most
reasonably well-informed New Zealanders experiences, our country is
now very much at a crossroads where our democracy and the very
sovereignty of our Parliament stands to be dramatically challenged and
changed. And it's all because of a reputedly benign
affirmation on something that there has never been a clear, unequivocal
mandate from this country's citizens.
Surely, the principal purpose of us entering the FTA with India is to provide
economic benefits to New Zealand.
Of and in itself, the United Nations Declaration of Independence,
UNDRIP or UNDRIPAs you like to pronounce it, has nothing
whatsoever to do with achieving economic benefits for New
Zealand or India. So given what I have just covered and
my own reservations expressed as to its relevance in my written submission,
the questions I respectfully would suggest you
seek to have answered are, one, what is the rationale and
purpose of inserting a requirement for New Zealand to affirm UNDROP
when we know that in 2007, our own permanent resident
to the United Nations, Rosemary Banks, and
with the endorsement of our Prime Minister at the time, Helen Clark, spelt out in
some significant detail why New Zealand would not sign up to
it, and why those reasons have never been addressed,
let alone overturned, not least of all by the will
and want of the majority of this country's citizens.
Two, we know that our affirmation of UNDROP will almost certainly
rekindle seditious he puapua-like aspirations that
go to the heart of our current democracy and sovereignty of our Parliament,
and that this will involve very substantial costs, both financially,
socially and constitutionally, should this proceed.
So where is the cost-benefit analysis to justify this UNDROP
affirmation objective, and where again is the mandate?
I would suggest to you the answers are obvious, and that this has nothing to do
with economic trade and benefit, and everything to do with an ideological
change to our country's constitutional operation.
I beg you to consider seeking answers to these questions, and unless
very clear and concise reasons can be given that
outweigh the now obvious risks and likely very substantial
costs, then I earnestly ask you to recommend the removal of the UNDROP
reference before there is any formal ratification of the FTA.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning.
Appreciate your insights. Cheers.
Okay, we come next to Helma Vermeulen.
Hello.
Good morning. Excellent.
Good morning to you.
We can't see you.
Okay.
You see me now?
Yes, we can. Excellent. Okay. We've five minutes for you this morning. Over to you.
This trade agreement, it's a highly conditional economic
integration agreement. It is downright catastrophic for New
Zealand. Like it or not, our lives and our
will be shaped by this trade deal. To me, the result of this trade
deal gives me pervasive feeling of
but rather a chaotic future for New Zealand.
The question that arises is that the moment India
back against allowing GMO products, and according to the PM
of India, the subject is very sensitive.
This trade agreement significantly includes agriculture and
horticulture product, honey, wine, kiwi fruits, and apples.
According to the Farmers Weekly, India has the right to suspend
these tariffs if certain conditions are not met.
This condition could be that imported produce was in contact with
genetically modified crops in New Zealand.
I do not understand why some political parties will push
GMO and the HSNO amendment
bill and likewise push the trade agreement with India.
This does not make sense. Why would you want to introduce GMO
crops while at the drop of a hat, India can stop
importing our product for this reason?
On the 16th of September 2025, in the first post,
wrote an article that India prohibited the import of USA
GMO corn. After a firm talk with the USA,
they allowed it to be made into animal feed.
India is very cautious about importing GMO
crops. India's GMO policy has not changed.
It mentions fruit and nuts. The out
clause is hidden in multiple
for those products. Why run the risk in a free trade agreement
that India can stop the import of our agricultural and
horticultural export products if we allow
GMOs to be used in New Zealand? If we do not
have the benefits of exporting our products to India,
what benefit is this deal to the average New Zealand
citizens? Is this all about immigration, fintech,
e-payments, or temporary skilled work visas for
working holidays? New Zealanders deserve to know what
is the real reason that those two bills are pushed by the same
political parties but are in conflict.
I'm afraid that it could not be about exporting our
produce. It could be about intentional replacement
reglobalization. This trade agreement will cause increased
strain on the public infrastructure, housing,
transport, and healthcare, and the downward pressure on
wages for low-skilled workers. Also, social
integration challenges can polarize and cause environmental
wear and tear. Most New Zealanders do not want the
consequences and risk this trade deal agreement
brings. This trade agreement must be stopped.
It does not function in a fair democracy.
Do not let this trade agreement pass.
You need to go back to the table to negotiate.
New Zealanders need an answer to this bill and the conflict
it has with the Gene Tech bill or the other bill, what is the hazard bill,
what's on the moment before select committee.
Neither bill is popular, and it will greatly affect our life.
Also, it's not a fair process.India was
willing to reject imports from the USA, who are the leaders of the free
world. They're not like New Zealand.
After they had a trade agreement, they stopped the import
of corn, and it was a big kerfuffle between that because
the American public of the USA actually didn't know they
would stop this. Because what would they do with New Zealand
if we export our fruit and our agricultural and
horticultural product? They can actually stop it right there and then.
And what benefit, actually, this trade deal have got for New
Zealanders?
All right. Thank you very much. I've got time for a quick question if members have
one.
Wonderful. Thank you, Ms. Vermeulen. Appreciate your time this morning.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay, next up, we have Dylan Shaw.
Morning, Mr. Shaw.
Kia ora. Kia ora. How are you?
I'm good, thank you. I'll hand straight over to you.
Perfect. Well, kia ora. My name's Dylan Shaw. I'm originally from Dunedin.
I'm presenting the perspective of a young Kiwi, one of many who's found themselves
feeling unheard, unseen, and unwanted in their own land.
International trade forms a large part of our economy and provides jobs for our
people. However, this agreement poses risks regarding migration,
housing, the cost of living, the environment, and the preservation of New Zealand's
unique cultural identity.
New Zealand's already experienced huge population growth pressures through
immigration. Stats NZ recorded an annual net migration of
135,000 people in 2023 and a net gain of
54,000 non-New Zealand citizens in 2025.
Indian citizens were among the largest groups arriving, with over 17,000
arrivals in 2025 alone.
Numbers like this don't encourage integration.
They create pockets within our cities where New Zealanders are fast becoming the
minority, such as in Papatoetoe, where the 2023
census showed that the Indian population was already at 37%.
I was in Canada last month, and similar migration has been
overwhelming there. I've got many Canadian friends, and they've all expressed to
me that they no longer feel like their country's theirs or that it's even Canada
at all anymore. Here, our roads, schools, and hospitals are already under
strain. The last time I went to hospital, I was the only one in the waiting room
who was even speaking English. Before increasing migration,
New Zealand needs to ensure our infrastructure can cope with its current demand.
Housing affordability is a serious issue, pushing our people out of the market and
off our shores. I'm one of the many who moved overseas to work, and talking
to other Kiwis who have done the same thing, it was pretty clear that the housing
costs are a main driving force of the exodus.
More people arriving increases the demand, and demand dictates price.
That's just simple economics. Muldoon had it dead wrong.
Kiwis leaving our shores for other countries does not raise the IQ of both
places. We're losing our people to the benefit of other nations because we
simply can't afford to live where we were born.
The government has to prioritize housing affordability for Kiwis
before causing additional population growth.
They can say what they like about building more houses, but even if they did, the
damage to our already fragile environment would be catastrophic.
Selective migration to fill skill shortages is a short-term fix, but
a better long-term strategy would be to make New Zealand a place where Kiwis want
to and can afford to stay. It's ludicrous that the current coalition is
simultaneously cutting jobs and encouraging immigration.
We have many underutilized people already here and using our infrastructure
who should be trained and made use of.
With technology advancing the way it is, jobs are becoming increasingly scarce.
Bringing more people in who will soon become a permanent burden is just plain
shortsighted.
There's to be no limit on the number of Indian students who can come to New
Zealand, and on top of this, they're eligible to work for at least 20 hours a
week. That's great business for the universities.
However, in a labor market with unemployment at the highest rate in a decade and
around 15% for people aged between 15 to 24, this
agreement allows unlimited Indians to compete with born and bred New Zealanders for
jobs. I've had a job since I started high school.
My friends were all largely the same.
We all took part-time jobs, taught us work ethic, gave us experience,
valuable references, and a bit of financial independence.
These types of jobs will be highly sought after by these students.
Supporters of the agreement argue that expanded trade will increase economic growth
and lower prices. Having lived both abroad and at home, I was shocked to see our
products priced cheaper on the other side of the world than they are 10 minutes
down the road from where they're made.
I'm concerned that exporters will further prioritize exports over domestic supply.
Our country then becomes a farm where we see food being grown but can't afford to
eat it.
Economic growth means nothing if our whanaus continue struggling to afford food.
The New Zealand China FTA, for example, has helped lead to dairy goods being priced
out of reach of many of our own people, and in return, we have polluted rivers that
are unsafe to swim in or collect kai from.
Large amount of our agricultural land and processing companies are now owned by
overseas investors, an example being the acquisition of Westland Dairy products by
China's Yili Group. Sending profits which have been made at the detriment of our
environment overseas benefits no real New Zealanders.
Our freshwater system's already under stress.
Intensification of agriculture has contributed to water quality issues,
nutrient runoff, and biodiversity loss, putting our environment on a pathway to
destruction to feed those who couldn't care less.
I should be cheering for this agreement. I own a property.
I've got 45,000 trees growing on it to sell as timber.
Under this agreement, I should stand to gain, but the bigger implications for me,
my family, and all New Zealanders far outstrips any of the rewards.
Instead, I'm left disturbed by an agreement that will exacerbate problems faced by
New Zealanders every single day to help fatten the wallets of the few at the
detriment of the many. Please do not ratify this agreement for the sake of us
all. Thank you for your time.
Time.
And I welcome any questions, yeah, from the committee.
Okay. We're over time now, so we'll keep moving, but appreciate your insights this
morning. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, next up we have Anne
HeemGood
morning, Ms. Hem. Can you hear us?
Looks like your mute is on there.
There we go. It says, "Yeah, yeah."
Okay. We can hear you, but we can't see you.
Oh, can't see me? Oh, right.
Yeah. Can you see me? Yeah?
No, we can't. Oh, yes, now we can. Okay.
All right, I'll hand straight over to you. Thank you.
Oh, yeah. I just wanted a quick question.
It's a bit different from my original
submission. So I've
edited a little bit of...
Is that okay?
You're breaking up a bit there, but absolutely, you're welcome to speak
to your submission now, or your
views if that's the same or a reaction-
Okay. Yeah
... or what have you.
I just make sure I've got my shade up. Yeah.
Oh, yeah. I'll start reading it now.
Should I start reading it now?
Yes, please. Yep.
Hello.
Okay, so
submission for FTA agreement India.
Many Indians migrate to New Zealand for better healthcare,
education, and the opportunity of working in New Zealand.
In India, air pollution has severe ranking among the highest
country polluted globally around the world, such as
the city New Delhi. There is soil contamination caused
from industrial waste and pesticides, further threatens
agriculture regarding their approach to health and safety.
In this case, we receive exports from India, and there is no
assurance that our laws around health and safety is
observed, known as OSH. Inflation is high
in India, and Indian rupee is only worth
0.0118, so that's 18 cents New
Zealand dollar. And if you are looking to buy a loaf of bread,
our New Zealand dollar would be $1.08, and in
India is equal to 60 rupees. This
FTA agreement could lead to a cost for taxpayers.
There is more choice of cheap dollar items sold in Asian and
Indian businesses, pushing out Kiwi-owned businesses,
leading to business closing.
Indians' basic culture is a country that allows
multiple marriages, removing the private part
of a man to become a leader of a harem.
And this practice is generational and is carried on
generation after
generation within one
family. Even in present time, this is
exploitation of a child. And in New Zealand as a country, we shouldn't be
supporting a country that abuses rights as a family to have children,
such as in China. And the rights of men, women, and children to be
trafficked in India. How can we as a country
condone such barbaric laws?
South Africa was a segregated country.
Now they have their freedom. New Zealand didn't support
segregation and protest by boycotting sports competition
and refusing to play against South Africa.
This made a huge difference for South Africans, leading
to freedom and being treated as equals
no matter their skin color.
Shouldn't us as New Zealanders also stand against a country
that supports the exploitation of children and wives that are
subject to abuse? A country that supports
arranged marriages to young children, practice
polygamy, removal of private part, and child
labor, and also the selling of children to perform sexual
acts known as concubines. The FTA agreement
with India is only confirming the beliefs of Indians
as okay, when these beliefs and culture is not
okay. The loss of small businesses as the competition
has lowered the prices to a point New Zealand small businesses
cannot compete. Do not accept this
FTA agreement with India. Our country, New Zealand, that has
nearly sold out our basic principles and culture.
And as a country, New Zealand, our culture is being forgotten.
Written by Anne Hem.
All right. Thank you for that, Ms.
Hem. Any questions from members?
So, yes. So would you
like me to upload the
edited version?
You're welcome to send that through to the committee, yes.
Okay. Thank you. We come now to Fiona McKenzie.
Okay. So
I'm sorry, I'm having trouble with the camera.
Well, we can hear you, so that's a good start.
Okay. Shall I carry on?
Yes. Look, if you're able to get it working, that'd be ideal.
If you can't-
It will be
... then we'll just crack straight into it.
I have had this problem before.
Okay. All right. Over to you.
Usually.
Okay.
Oh, good morning, by the way. I oppose ratification
of the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement as it currently
stands. My objection is not about trade.
With Nicola Willis's budget fresh in our minds, I know we need
exports to boost our economy,
but New Zealand's economic future also depends on attracting
and keeping skilled workers, entrepreneurs, and investment,
and that's the problem.
We can only do that in New Zealand if we can offer stability, legal
equality, secure property rights, transparency,
consistency, and accountability.
We should be strengthening these democratic foundations, not undermining them.
So my objection is about the affirmation of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People, or UNDRIP,
along with various other race-based clauses in the document.
These clauses go well beyond the normal purpose and parameters of a trade
agreement,
and can only further undermine our democracy.
Back in 2007, Labor Prime Minister Helen Clark
stated that the declaration was incompatible with New Zealand's constitutional
and illegal arrangements.
I'd add that it's also incompatible with New Zealand's actual history, our shared
story of immigration, and our blended people.
But then National did a deal with the Maori Party, resulting in the secretive
signing of UNDRIP.
The Arden-Hipkins Labor government then began
implementing UNDRIP with He Puapua, the roadmap for tribal
control by 2040,
co-governance, tribal control of public services and resources,
vetos, dual sovereignty, and more and more
ancestral-based money flows.
The majority of New Zealand's citizens rejected these separatist
concepts in the 2023 election. Consequently, the current
coalition government made explicit commitments to
democracy,
equal citizenship regardless of race or ancestry,
parliamentary sovereignty, and the rule of law.
These promises were believed.
But since the recent outing of UNDRIP's inclusion in the trade deal,
many have asked why
and have not been happy with the answers. There have been reassurances like, "Oops.
Oh, never mind. We'll never do it again." We hear a lot of that, "We'll never do it
again."
Or, "It doesn't mean anything," and we've heard that refrain many times before,
too.
Again, we're told not to worry.
The problem is that New Zealanders have every reason to be skeptical.
The
mythical principles, the undefinable Tikanga,
attacks on private property rights,
religious and cultural impositions,
tribal consults, and very expensive approvals,
the debacle of claims for New Zealand's entire coastline,
councils giving governing power to tribes and families,
even today,
and an out-of-control activist judiciary.
They all spring to mind, and taxpayers pay for it all.
So the affirmation of UNDRIP cannot be politically neutral and
certainly doesn't belong in this trade agreement.
If the current government is intent on enabling He
Puapua to be reborn,
then the changes to our Constitution should be openly disclosed,
debated, and go to a binding referendum, ideally at the
next election.
In the meantime, UNDRIP and other distinctions between New Zealand citizens on the
basis of ancestry should not be embedded by any international
trade agreement for activists and lawyers to use
against us, and we know they will.
Asking India to agree to the removal of these clauses
will not affect trade between our countries by a single
dollar. It would instead confirm the focus on
trade and remind the government that constitutional
rearrangements must be in the hands of all New Zealanders.
Our government must be transparent.
It must honor its commitments and treat all citizens
equally before the law.
These principles are vital to peace, prosperity, and social cohesion.
So I ask that you, as our elected representatives, defend them
by not ratifying this agreement until all provisions relating to
UNDRIP, as well as the race or ancestry of New Zealand
citizens, are removed.
And that's all. Thank you.
Thank you very much. All right. Appreciate your time this morning.
Okay, we're just over time, so we'll move now to New Zealand Apples and Pears.
Good morning, Danielle.
Good morning. Good morning.
All right.
Thanks for having me.
No problem. We'll have you sit down for 10 minutes this morning on behalf of Apples
and Pears. I'll hand straight over to you.
Good. Sounds great. So my name's Danielle Adshead, and I'm the CEO of New
Zealand Apples and Pears. New Zealand Apples and Pears represents
256 growers, 40 export pack houses, and over 30 exporters.
All growers in New Zealand are members of New Zealand Apples and Pears, and as
such, we thoroughly consult and work closely with our members to prioritize work
areas.
Our industry has over a billion dollars in export revenue, with almost $2
billion of total economic
impactIndia has been a focus
for our membership since we first gained access back in the early
1990s, as it's one of our last markets which applies a
tariff. At the current 50% tariff rate, it is very difficult to be
competitive.
New Zealand already sells some of the most expensive apples globally, largely due
to the premium our apples demand, but also due to our high
cost of production. As such, remaining competitive in India against
our key competitors in Chile, South Africa, and the US remains a challenge.
India is a highly sensitive and a complex market for apples.
There are just shy of a million apple growers in India,
and apples remain one of the top 10 most popular fruits.
And apple growers in India, as such, are very protective of their base.
The inclusion of apples in the India-New Zealand FTA was no small task and
is a genuine world first and a major strategic achievement
for New Zealand growers.
And this achievement
reflects decades of trust and collaboration between India and New Zealand growers,
research, and institutions.
From the initial submissions when FTA negotiations were announced, New Zealand
apples and pears, alongside our key industry partners,
approached senior officials with the concept of a cooperation
plan to be used as meaningful leverage to include apples in the
negotiations. We then worked tirelessly through
2025, including many visits, to engage with key Indian
officials, state government, and growers, particularly in the Himachal Pradesh,
which is about 12 hours up the foothills of the Himalayas, to explore the
offerings.
The Apple Cooperation Plan is central to the agreement and demonstrates New Zealand
growers' ongoing commitment to uplifting Indian productivity,
and New Zealand apple and pear growers are very eager to begin this work.
There is no concern from our growers that India's
productivity will be competitive against New Zealand apples.
New Zealand are fortunate to grow apples in the counter-season,
which means that our supply is complementary rather than
in competition with Indian apples.
Initial estimates suggest that the FTA will initially return up
to 25 million New Zealand dollars back into the New Zealand industry.
However, future opportunity for growth in this market is huge, as you
can appreciate.
This improved access will support jobs and resilience in regional New Zealand,
where pit fruit industry underpins local economies and employment
and will lead to future investment in our sector.
Make no mistake, diversity of market is critical to our
industry's success.
We view the India-New Zealand FTA as the first step in a long-term
partnership that supports growers and communities in both India and New
Zealand, and we look forward to working with our government officials on future
concessions at later dates. And finally,
I just want to thank all senior government officials who poured their sweat and
tears into making this happen. Your hard work definitely hasn't gone
unnoticed. Thank you, and kia ora.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that. First question from Vanushi Walters.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank you very much for your submission.
You referenced the seasonal window and that being
useful in that we won't be competing.
Is there also, though, an opportunity to grow on the ground and increase
total production in terms of supplying other markets?
In India or-
Yes
... growing on the ground in New Zealand?
Growing on the ground in India.
Yeah, there'll be commercial opportunities there for some of
our
grower base that have access to PVRs.
However, that's not the initial priority.
The initial priority is growing apples in New Zealand for sale in
India.
Growing in India isn't without its challenges.
Climate change makes it very tough to grow, and the landscape is very
challenging.
Okay. Thank you. Next question, Dr. Lawrence Cheung.
Kia ora. Thank you so much, Chair. Thank you for joining us today.
Can I just ask you, when we asked Zespri, they said that the only
part of the kiwifruit plan is the green kiwifruit and not our more
patented kiwifruit. What variety will be a part of
this apple plan, and what variety will not be?
So varieties are not a part of our cooperation plan.
Our cooperation plan is built on knowledge transfer,
so how to grow apples to the best of their ability.
We will not be giving any varieties as a part of this cooperation plan.
Thank you.
All right. Tim Costley.
Yeah, thank you.
Look, we heard in an earlier submission from the CTU, they told
us that these kind of free trade agreements and this one specifically, it won't
help create jobs in New Zealand, it won't increase wages in New Zealand,
and they urged us not to support it.
Can you explain what it means, this deal will mean for people that
work in the apple and pear industry in New Zealand? Will it create jobs?
Will it create growth? Will it raise incomes?
Will it have any positive benefit?
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely, it will.
Look, volumes to India are already increasing off the back of the
FTA being announced. India is actually a high-paying
market for New Zealand apples. And what we see is when we've got diversification of
market, it actually lifts the bar across the total
global exports. So if there's more money coming back into New
Zealand or more demand for New Zealand apples globally, that leads
to future investments. Growers then plant more apples,
they receive more money for their apples sold, and therefore the
whole, that trickles down that supply chain.
Thank you.
Next question, Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much. Thanks for the submission.
Do you seriously believe that there will not be the transfer
of varieties into India for growing?
Well, there's no intention from New Zealand apples and pears to start the process
of transfer of varieties
I appreciate that, but the question really does go to the heart of the partnership
arrangements with them, because I think that's the expectation from the
Indian side. And so the question is how you'll handle that.
So yes, we've come up against the Indian side wanting varieties, and
we've been very clear on our intentions.
The only way that they will get New Zealand varieties is if we export our
genetics to them.
So it's not a case of just walking it across the border.
Some of our commercial partners may choose to partner in India, for the release of
some varieties, but that's completely commercial, and outside of the cooperation
project. So we will not be exporting New Zealand genetics to
India under this cooperation plan.
That is we,
I mean, individual growers have, and as we've seen in other
areas, have individual cooperation agreements or
partnerships as they build up. So they can choose to do that
themselves?
If that's commercial, it's completely up to them.
Okay.
But it's not our intention that it's a part of the gift of the
cooperation plan.
Thank you.
Very good.
All right. Thank you very much for your time this morning, Ms. Adsett.
Appreciate your insights on behalf of apples and pears. Cheers.
Thank you so much.
Okay, next up we have Clyde Soares.
Hopefully I've pronounced that correctly, Clyde.
Good morning.
Good morning, Clyde. We can't see you yet, but we can-
I've turned the video on as well.
Oh, there we go. Wonderful. Thank you.
All right, we have five minutes set down for you this morning.
I'll hand straight to you.
Cool. So I'll give you a quick background. My name's Clyde Soares.
I'm a proud New Zealand citizen who moved here from India in 1989
with my wife.
We've raised our three children in New Zealand.
I have regular contact and deep knowledge of India and Indians, and I've just
returned from a three-month stay and tour of India,
exploring business opportunities primarily.
Over the last decade, I have watched the floodgates open to uncontrolled
immigration, especially from India, and the corresponding change in the social
value system of New Zealand.
I have first-hand experience of mass exploitation of Indians
coming into New Zealand on student, tourist, and even
work visas,
primarily, unfortunately, by unscrupulous Indian business owners
themselves.
I'm strongly opposed to this rushed, in my opinion, flawed FTA.
Kiwis,
sad to say, are naive in terms of how this deal will see massive
fraud and cheating by bad actors.
My concerns.
In addition to the complete refusal of the Indian side to even talk about dairy
exports, which by the way, constitutes 40% of our exports
to China,
this is probably the first trade deal in the world that is, one, so
rushed in what seems to be an attempt to score points ahead of an election and
appease an Indian voter base.
Number two, not focused on trade itself, but
appears that New Zealand has been coerced into a deal with strings attached
in terms of tying it to immigration,
funding,
FDI funding into New Zealand, and
UNDRIP
clauses, which really shouldn't be any part of a free trade deal.
It also brings into focus the ludicrous non-contra deal where
New Zealand is expected to promote FDI
investment of up to $33 billion over 15 years
into India.
It's ludicrous because of the fact that at the moment as it stands,
the Indian economy is 16 to 17 times larger than the New
Zealand economy.
New Zealand gets, I think, around $3 to 4 billion of FDI a year.
India gets $82 billion of FDI into its economy.
So it just seems ludicrous that there's this expectation on India for
a non-contra deal to put money into India.
I understand it's non-binding, but there's an expectation that it will be highly
and actively promoted.
Finally, the fourth clause under Article 13.2 of the FTA,
which states that
is the chapter dealing with Maori and indigenous people,
and the commitment by New Zealand to affirm the
UNDRIP rights and their respective positions.
Why I think this is ludicrous, again, is as a free trade deal,
these sorts of issues should not be brought into a trade agreement.
This is an internal affair of how we deal with the Treaty of
Waitangi, the obligations that we have.
It's not something that we should bring forward into a platform which is between
nations.
By doing this, effectively what it's doing is it's giving Maori an
extra pathway into India that other people do not seem to appear to
have.
Let me go into it in a bit more detail.
One, the FTA, and these are the things which I am very familiar with because
I've experienced the downside of it both in New Zealand and in India.
First, the FTA creates a dedicated TEE entry visa pathway for
5,000 Indian professionals over three years.
Is this an immigration concession or a tightly managed people skills
pipeline?
India views this as a major pathway and a major win of the FTA, and
they fought hard for it.
Some of the drivers from what I've been hearing in India is that this is important
because, one, India's experienced a big backlash in the US in
terms of the restrictions on the H-1B visas for IT professionals and
skilled workers.
And the second thing is that the IT sector in India
itself, because of the influence of AI, has been having massive cutbacks,
especially in this last year. Over 270,000 jobs have been cut back
across the industry.So India is in a real desperate situation
to see how they can promote their labor pool and export them
overseas.
It is naive to expect that at the end of three
years, and I can tell you this, I will
give you an assurance right now that at the end of the three years, if of those
5,000 per year or 5,000 at any one time
visa holders, you will find a minuscule amount of them actually returning.
Because as it stands right now, there is no restriction on them or their
family, which they are allowed to bring, from applying for work visas or other
category of immigration things whilst they are still under the TEE.
So take, for example, a person who's come here as an employed professional, or not
employed. So right now, you don't even have to have a work visa, you just have this
TEE category that you can come into.
Bring your family, no clauses to stop a family member from applying for other
categories of visas, and then under their basis, these people can stay on again.
I can tell you that when I was in India these last three months, the only ads
you're seeing in the paper are 5,000 opportunities for visas to Indian
citizens, and it's being promoted again by unscrupulous
people who we know have rotted the immigration system already.
They are seeing this as a great gateway to immigration, and that's how it's being
promoted in India. It's not being promoted in any way as a
temporary visa like you have when you go to Dubai or you go somewhere else.
It's being promoted, take you and your family and go there, and they're charging
you a fancy fee in India as well for providing those
services. So I can guarantee you that this is not the case.
So the next point I'm going to bring up again is that-
I'm sorry, that brings us, we're over time already, unfortunately, Mohries.
Wow, okay. Sorry.
We appreciate your insights into the FTA. Thank you very much.
Okay, next up we have Ms. McLean,
who I think we have online with us.
Right. Can you hear us?
Excellent. Okay, it looks like you're still on mute there, Leona.
So if you can take that off, then we'll be happy to hear from you for your five
minutes.
Oh, there we go.
That's it.
Okay. My name's Leona McLean. I'm a New Zealand citizen.
I'd like to put forward
for the FTA deal about
weapons,
no
weapons should be carried, not even for religious beliefs.
Okay? Normally,
not only the Quran, they usually follow the Old Testament with the
Indian side of things, which includes the Ten Commandments,
thou shall not kill. So I'm sort of like yeah,
I'd like to put a halt on that.
So with that alone, I'd be quite willing to challenge their
religious beliefs
as they still consider stoning even today in
today's world, which is also in the Old Testament.
However, this is New Zealand and not India, and their
laws and beliefs should not have an impact on New Zealand
people. New Zealanders have the right to walk down the street and
know that no one is allowed to carry a
deadly weapon,
and because of the New Zealand laws, no one can carry a weapon.
A dagger is actually a deadly weapon and is no
different to a knife.
Incidences of
openly wearing a kirpan in
public
sparks a lot of debate and panic online,
as there was a Papakura back in April
2026, a lady wore a kirpan at
a cafeteria, generating a lot of attention of concern.
In New Zealand, pilots and bus drivers have had
concerns of security
safety.
School policies cause friction requiring
consultations with the school boards.
And then we've got the examples of Dunedin,
January the 24th, a man was sentenced to life imprisonment
in prison with a minimum of non-parole of
17.5 years for
murdering and partially decapitating a former
employee. And both of these men were from India.
16th of May 2007,
Indian student,
who stabbed a pregnant woman.
An Auckland man has twice been convicted of
stabbing his pregnant partner, imposing a
15-year jail term.
Then we have July the 10th 2024, an
Indian man pleads guilty of attempted murder
in Auckland, stabbing a family member at
McDonald's.
The 4th of October 2016,
an Indian man jailed for killing his pregnant
girlfriend. And then we have the 17th of
November 2025, there was a murder
taking place, 46 stab wounds, and it's still waiting trial.
To me, it proves that it's a very radical
cultureNumber two,
committing a serious crime.
I'd like to see the government submit that
if tried and convicted, the New Zealand government would have them deported
back to India,
the Indian government to be responsible to
have the sentence carried out in their country.
I don't see why it should come at the cost of the New Zealand people.
If convicted of fraud or murder or some serious crime,
immediate deportation before or after
citizenship.
As in the past, an Indian man falsified documents of being a
doctor, being exposed after a year.
That was here in New Zealand. The same thing has actually occurred
in Australia, being exposed after 11 years,
causing death and harm and fleeing the country, and
they still haven't tried him till today.
I say no
where it comes to New Zealanders shouldn't have to
suffer their consequences of their crimes, costing
taxpayer money.
Help them to make New Zealand a better place.
All right.
And then we go to-
That presents us with time available unfortunately, Ms.
McLean, so we'll have to keep moving, but we appreciate your contribution this
morning. Thank you.
Can I do my conclusion?
Unfortunately-
Thank you
... we're already over time. So we'll come now to Hobson's Pledge.
And we should have Gary Judd KC and Don Brash joining us.
Good morning.
Hello.
Good morning, Mr. Judd.
Are we waiting on Mr. Brash as well?
I
don't think that Dr. Brash is joining us. I think it's just me.
All right.
So, um-
I'll hand straight over to you
... thank you. Thank you again, Mr.
Chairman, and committee members for giving me
the opportunity to speak on this occasion.
I'm speaking on instructions from Hobson's Pledge.
In my earlier submission, I explained why we should be deeply
concerned about the provision in the FTA
affirming UNDROP and New Zealand's position under it.
And,
I've since, or before and since heard the
presentations from Richard Arlidge and Fiona
McKenzie, and I would endorse what they say.
Now,
I appreciate that
there is
nothing directly
or immediately that the committee can do about
this issue,
because the
removing it from the FTA would require reopening a
signed agreement, and that from a practical point of view is
pretty near impossible. And also the committee is severely
constrained by the standing orders under which it
operates. However,
I do have a solution.
But before I get to that, I want to
give you a practical example of how the
affirmation in the FTA may be used in
practice.
Last Thursday, my local council, the Far
North District Council, resolved to enter a
collaboration with the hapū of
Ahipara
for the management of a historic
reserve.
Reserves Act 1977 requires the council
to manage that reserve for the benefit and enjoyment of the
public
in accordance with
the provisions of the Reserves Act.
The Act makes the council responsible to manage the
reserve.
Only the minister may decide to place management in
someone else's hands.
So the decision to hand management to the hapū is
legally questionable at the very least.
If that decision is challenged in court,
Article 26 of UNDROP may be used to
support an interpretation of the legislation
that favors transferring management to the hapū.
Now, Article 26 was one of the reasons why New
Zealand refused to support UNDROP in
2007.
It says, among other things,
that Indigenous peoples have the right to control land
they have traditionally owned
or occupied.
In the early days, the Ahipara reserve
land was part of a significant Maori settlement,
but it was sold
and went through several owners, including the Catholic Church,
before it ended up being owned by the council as a reserve.
Nevertheless, it would qualify in terms of Article
26 as land traditionally
owned or occupied.
Now, as New Zealand's affirmation of UNDROP
gives UNDROP added weight in legal
decision-making,
the council's hand will be strengthened if it
argues that the legislation permits the transfer of management.
So that's a practical example.
And leaving it,
and as a lead in to the way in which the
government and the House may remedy the problem,
I want to refer to the national interest analysis
presented to the House with the free trade
agreementI want to focus first
on Section 4,
which deals with advantages and disadvantages to
New Zealand if the treaty enters into force.
At Section 4.12
on page 60, if anyone wants to look it up,
dealing with Chapter 13 of the FTA,
the analysis accurately records
at the end of paragraph 4.12.1 that
the chapter does not impose
legal or financial obligations on either party,
and it is not subject to dispute settlement mechanisms under the
agreement.
Nor India
can compel the other to do the things in Chapter
13.
But as I have said, that does not mean
the UNDRIP provision is harmless or ineffective.
If it were meaningless, it would not have been included.
And what the NIA does not tell the House
is that affirming UNDRIP is in the FTA.
UNDRIP is not even mentioned.
You and the country probably
are about,
because my client discovered it with...
Nor were the elected representatives
told that the direction the cabinet gave
at the beginning of 2024 to halt
implementation of UNDRIP has been ignored,
because
upgrading
UNDRIP from being noted
to being affirmed
is
an implementation move.
Now, I understand that the minister has now
directed MFAT that UNDRIP is not to be
referred to in future FTAs.
Now, that's obviously welcome,
but it doesn't answer the obvious question:
how did it come to be affirmed in this one?
To you.
If a ministry has ignored a government
direction, it's something beholding.
It's a serious matter
not to even make the House aware that New Zealand
has now made a commitment.
These serious failures, in my submission,
demand
recommend one.
But a future instruction
and even an inquiry
still do not fix the problem which has already been created,
and that's what I want to now move to.
As I said before, I don't think it's practical to consider
reopening the agreement or not ratifying the
agreement,
but there is a solution,
and that solution payers from the
National Interest Analysis itself.
Section 6 says that new legislation
and amendments to existing legislation
will be required to bring the agreement into force.
It says that those measures will be
included in a single omnibus bill.
I urge the committee to recommend that the government
and the House
include in that bill
a provision along these lines.
Subsection one,
that the FTA's affirmation of UNDRIP
does not give it the force of law,
does not give it presumptive weight in interpreting
legislation,
and does not make it a relevant consideration.
And a second subsection, for the avoidance of doubt,
that for all purposes of New Zealand law, policy,
and practice, UNDRIP must be disregarded.
I also
would urge the government,
or the committee rather, to recommend to the government
that the government formally advise the
United Nation
that New Zealand no longer endorses the declaration,
and that the position taken in 2007
has been reinstated.
So, that's my solution, which doesn't involve
the undesirable
negotiate the FTA, but does deal with the
problem which has been created.
I'm happy to answer any questions, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much for speaking to that, and always nice to get a
potential solution rather than just hearing problems.
I just wanted to get quickly your take on the
clause because you talk about affirming the agreement.
It states in the clause that the parties, subject to their
respective reservations, affirm it.
And so I'm interested in your insight around the respective
reservation piece, and also then they affirm
UNDRIP and their respective positions made on that declaration.
And our position is that it doesn't have any binding legal effect.
So would that not deal with the concern you have?
Well, that is not our-- With respect, Mr.
Chairman,
that's not our position.
Well, it is. That's-
To deal with the first point-
... specifically taken from the coalition agreement.
So that is the government's position currently
The government's position currently is the decision Cabinet took at the beginning
of 2024 to halt implementation of UNDRIP.
New Zealand's position is as advised to the United Nations,
and the most recent advice to the United Nations was in July
2023, when
New Zealand indicated that it was committed to implementing
UNDRIP. But coming back to the question of reservations,
India had a reservation to Article
13.2.2A,
and essentially that reservation was based on the
proposition that India didn't actually have any indigenous
people.
New Zealand does not have a reservation.
New Zealand has simply affirmed UNDRIP and New
Zealand's position
without qualification.
All right. Okay, we'll come quickly to Laura McClure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Gary, and thanks for a potential solution.
Thinking about the 2023
affirmation by the New Zealand government,
would another fix to this be just for our government
to
go back and essentially change
the position that we were at? Or do you think it requires both the legal
change and the ratification documents that we will present to
Parliament?
I think it requires both, because
if you change New Zealand's position, but you still
affirm UNDRIP, you've got a contradiction.
And anybody who has had anything to do with the courts, and
I've had about 50 years of having things to do with the courts,
will
go down a particular path. It will grab hold
of something which allows it to do so.
And if New Zealand does not positively
negate the affirmation which is given by
the inclusion of
13.2.2 in the FTA, then that is
likely to be taken by the courts
to be an indication that the courts
should
take UNDRIP into account. In my view,
a statement in the legislation that that is not to
happen, nothing less will suffice.
All right. Thank you very much. We appreciate your insights on behalf of Hobson's
Pledge. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Okay, we move now to Miguel Tanongon.
Good morning, Miguel.
We
can't see or hear you, Miguel.
Can you
hear
us, Miguel?
Hello.
Yes. Good morning.
We can't see you, unfortunately.
Miguel.
Oh, there we go.
I can hear you guys.
Okay, excellent. Over to you. Thank you.
Well, it's loading. Yes.
Thank you very much. Morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the select committee, good morning.
I'm Miguel, a citizen of a country called New Zealand, and to borrow some words
from the former Prime Minister Rob Muldoon, an honorary bloke.
I'd like to commence this oral presentation by discharging my apiscratude for the
allocation of time, and indeed letting you exercise speak on the FTA in third
national examination. I do hope and pray that you may find this presentation
enlightening within the brevity of time.
It is notable that I have written this submission on Anzac Day as to remember the
sacrifices by the troops for
the fight for peace and towards the national interests of their respective
countries. However, in my view,
this
FTA in its pro forma is the
utter contradiction to what the Anzac operation to the lives of our laws, and
therefore, generally speaking, explains my opposition to this FTA in my capacity as
a citizen of this country called New Zealand.
This FTA, in terms of tariff concessions, could be
drawn parallelism to the
bilateral trade agreement between President
Bongbong Marcos of the Philippines and President Trump, where the
Philippines opened its markets with the imposed of reduced tariffs from
20% to 19%. Therefore, this
agreement is neither free and nor
fair.
Given the challenging job market that
this country,
let alone in this
capital
city in this large city currently
face-This
agreement does not address the issue
rather giving this country's future away and-
Sorry, we
have-
Words to-
... difficulty hearing from you. So perhaps you-
Infrastructure
... try flicking, turning your camera off, then that might help our connection a
little bit to-
The essence of the issue, infrastructure
... enable us to hear you.
Healthcare.
Transport, education,
and also lest we forget the statement made by Minister Goyal
during countries like Laos. Also, New Zealand .
Even the citizenry of this being pessimistic on the opportunities in their country
was also worth growing the addition some clauses firstly.
Okay. Hello.
Can you hear me better? Hello.
Yes. We-
All right
... it was quite broken, but are there any questions
before
Well, I'm still yet to
finish my speech.
Okay. We have one minute left, so if you would like to allow questions then we'll
need to move to that. Otherwise, you can keep speaking for another minute.
So the other concern is the UNDRIP.
Although the
coalition agreement states that the coalition will stop all works on He Puapua and
confirm that the coalition agreement does not recognize UNDRIP
as having any legal binding effect on New Zealand.
And secondly, the clause on
the Paris Accord, albeit that New Zealand's emission only
amounts to 17%, and India is one of the world's
CO2 emitters alongside China, USA, and Russia.
And aside for that $22 billion being
siphoned from our economy to satisfy the Paris Accord, there is
also a clause that New Zealand being forced to promote a further
$33 billion of investment from New Zealand into India in the next
15 years. Not into New Zealand, into India.
Otherwise, India has the clawback clause where they would withdraw all
the things that we think we have gained out of this deal.
Therefore, $55 billion going overseas and not being invested in
New Zealand. If that's the case, I would not proceed with the agreement and rather
buy back BNZ. Thank you very much.
All right. Appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, we'll move now to the NZ Timber Industry Federation.
All right, Mr. Lott. Good morning. Welcome to the committee.
We have 10 minutes set down for your submission. Over to you.
Good morning. Good morning, Mr. Chair and members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today on behalf of the New Zealand Timber
Industry Federation in support of the free trade agreement
between New Zealand and India.
The federation represents manufacturers, processors, and exporters of
timber and wood products across New Zealand.
Our sector is a major contributor to regional employment, export earnings,
and sustainable land use, and we see this agreement
as a significant opportunity for both countries.
First, this agreement matters because timber is a strategic sector for
New Zealand.
Forest and wood processing generate around $6 billion in
annual export revenue and support thousands of jobs, particularly in regional
communities.
Timber is a renewable carbon storage material that aligns well with
the global shift towards lower emissions construction and
manufacturing.
For our industry, access to high growth markets is essential if we are to
remain competitive, invest in innovation, and expand value
added processing here in New Zealand.
Secondly,
India's economic growth, urbanization, and infrastructure development are
driving demand for construction materials, packaging,
furniture inputs, and sustainable engineered wood products.
At the same time, India relies heavily on imported wood
products to supplement a limited domestic supply.
New Zealand is well-placed to meet that demand.
Our plantation forests are sustainably managed, our
products are of high quality, and our industry has the capability to
be a reliable long-term supporter.
Thirdly, the current barriers to
trade are holding back that potential.
At present, high tariffs, non-tariff barriers, complex
phytosanitary requirements, customs
inefficiencies, and limited recognition of New
Zealand's forestry standards all increase costs and create uncertainty
for exports.
Those barriers make it hard to build
stable commercial relationships and reduce the
competitiveness of New Zealand exporters in a
market where long-term trust and reliability
matter.
Fourthly,
this FTA will deliver practical benefits.
It will improve market access through tariff reduction, support
better regulatory cooperation, and create a more predictable
trading environment.
It would also strengthen supply chain resilience by linking India's
growing demand with New Zealand's capacity to provide sustainable
timber products.Importantly, the agreement
will also support both countries' sustainability goals.
Timber has a critical role in lowering emissions in the built environment, and
increased trade in sustainably sourced wood can contribute to
more responsible construction.
For New Zealand, this is also an opportunity to grow exports of
processed and engineered wood products and to
encourage more onshore value-added manufacturing.
The agreement could also deepen cooperation across the forestry value chain,
including sustainable forest management, technical knowledge sharing, and
better alignment of standards, including recognition of radiata pine
and Indian building standards.
Finally,
the wider benefits would be felt in both economies.
For New Zealand, greater timber exports to India will support regional jobs,
encourage investment in domestic processing, and help diversify our
export markets. For India, it would mean improved access to
high-quality, sustainably produced timber to help
meet infrastructure and urban development needs.
In closing, New Zealand Timber Industry Federation strongly supports the
free trade agreement with India. We believe it will create meaningful
economic and sustainability benefits,
strengthen the valuable bilateral relationship, and open new
opportunities for our sector.
We encourage the committee to support the agreement and would be pleased to answer
any questions. Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much, Geoff. First question from Vanushi Walters.
Thank you, and thank you for your submission.
In your written submission, you mentioned the issue of limited
recognition of New Zealand's forestry standards and certification
systems.
So is that addressed within the agreement itself,
or are you suggesting that that'll need to be work that's done
from here on in to ensure that exporters can make the
best use of the market?
Yeah, absolutely. There's nothing in the agreement itself as such
other than the agreement for greater levels of cooperation.
Work is already underway.
MPI and Te Uru Rākau are working on some strategic
issues which will help see
radiata pine recognized as a building standard in Indian
building standards.
The goal is certainly for us to be aiming at the
higher end of the market, if you like, in India.
There's certainly a desire within the industry in New Zealand to move away
from providing or from the provision of lower
cost
timber to the more value-added
engineered wood products and higher value sawn products.
Thank you.
Next question from the Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much. Thanks for the submission.
Really rolling off the back of your response, how can we be sure that
there will be higher value timber products go into that market
rather than just actually a growing number of logs, which New
Zealanders are concerned, and I'm sure you are as well?
Yep, absolutely. Yeah, Mr. O'Connor, and thanks for the
question.
I guess that's over to us as an entire sector,
and in my 15 years in the sector, I've
never seen the sector so keen to
work collaboratively across all areas from forest owners
through to
processes to
develop the market at the higher end, at the more
value-added area. There will certainly still be logs exported
to India, but people are very keen not to
repeat the mistakes that were made in the China market, for
instance, that we made a number of years ago.
And that includes industry working together to
develop a number of initiatives, which I
sort of can't go into just at this point in time.
But industry is working collaboratively to ensure
everyone gets a piece of the pie, if you like.
And
yeah, there's a real recognition that
we don't want to see your brother busier over the road there sending
boatloads of logs, Mr. O'Connor, yeah.
Thank you.
Very good. All right. Mr. Ellop, thank you very much for your contribution this
morning on behalf of the NZ Timber Industry Federation. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay. We move now to a joint submission from the Meat Industry
Association and Beef and Lamb New Zealand.
Kia ora.
Just waiting for my colleague Frances, who should be joining.
Yes, Frances is here as well so-
Okay, cool
... if you'd like to jump straight into it.
We have 10 minutes.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Fantastic. Tena koutou katoa ko Frances Dagnall toku ingoa.
He hautū kaiwhakahaere au, e mahi ana au ki Beef
and Lamb New Zealand. Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Kia ora, I'm Frances Dagnall. I'm the head of international trade at Beef and Lamb
New Zealand. Beef and Lamb New Zealand is an industry good
body funded under the Commodities Levies Act of
1990,
and through a levy paid on all cattle and sheep slaughtered in New Zealand.
We represent both Maori and Pakeha sheep and beef levy payers,
and have the mandate to submit on their behalf.
I'll move over to my colleague, Ashlyn.
Kia ora koutou. My name's Ashlyn Chand.
I am the policy and trade manager here at the Meat Industry
Association. So the Meat Industry Association is the industry body
for New Zealand's red meat processors, marketers, and
exporters. It's a member-owned organization, and represents all the
companies behind almost all of New Zealand's sheep meat and
beef exports.
So the red meat sector is New Zealand's second-largest export industry, earning
around $12 billion a year and supporting more than
120,000 jobs directly and indirectly.
Some recent research has shown that the sector contributes about
$17.5 billion to New Zealand's GDP.
Trade, of course, is central to the sector, and
exports go to over 100 markets.
So broad market access is really essential for the resilience and long-term
growth of the sector,
and therefore we welcome the New Zealand India FTA, and we
acknowledge the work that has happened over a number of years by government and
officials to secure this agreement.
And in that vein, we support swift ratification so that the agreement can
enter into force as soon as possible,
as we believe the FTA opens access up to a young and dynamic
market with a growing demand for high quality and
safe protein. I'll hand over to Frances.
Look, as it stands, the overall trade to India
is relatively small. It's worth currently, or for in
2025, $91 million.
85% of that trade was wool,
where the current tariff rates were around 3%.
The main thing to say, though, is that India's tariff rates for other key
red meat sector products are among the highest faced across the sector's
export destinations. The high tariff rates make trade
commercially challenging for exporters,
and so the FTA will see significant trade reductions.
I'll just go through a couple of the key products.
So the sheep meat tariffs fall from 33% down to zero
upon entry into force. Prepared meat products are
currently up to 110%. That goes down to zero over
seven years. Hides and skins drops upon entry into
force. We've got 22% on pet food. That will
go down to zero over 10 years. Tariffs on blood products, which are used
for pharmaceuticals, that goes from 11 down to zero
over the phase-out period, and meat and bone meal products
goes from 33%
down to zero over five years. So these tariff cuts
are really, really significant for us, and it really opens up the door to
the India market for the first time.
These tariff cuts matter obviously, but that's only part of the picture.
Exporters also face significant non-tariff barriers into India, and
we estimate that the tariff equivalent impact is
almost around 66%, and the FTA creates a formal
pathway to address some of these non-tariff barriers. Ashlyn?
Yeah. So some of those regulatory barriers
includes really highly prescriptive animal health requirements,
and the like, which can now be addressed through
the sanitary and phytosanitary chapter in particular, which
supports implementing arrangements on matters like equivalence and
certification and audits, and it gives us, as Frances said, a
really formal bilateral mechanism to resolve some of these
barriers and challenges. It also strengthens trade
facilitation through electronic processes and streamlined border
clearance.
When requirements are met, goods are then to be released within 48
hours with an ambition to release perishable and express consignments.
And we understand that this is the first time that India has made such a commitment
in an FTA, which is really positive.
We consider that the FTA should be seen as a live agreement with scope
to improve market access
conditions further as it's implemented and as the relationship grows.
And we consider that in today's more unpredictable trading environment,
expanding our exporters' options is increasingly important,
and that stronger relationships and broader access will help build a
more resilient sector,
and that's why we support the India
FTA.
So thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and we're happy to take any
questions that the committee may have.
Wonderful. Thank you both for your contributions.
First question from the Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much, and just two questions.
Firstly, if you take aside wool, which neither of you have
responsibility for,
what is the value of the meat going into the market at the
moment?
It's about 14 million last year.
14? Okay.
Yeah. So total was 91 million, but about
85% was wool.
Okay.
Yeah.
Secondly, there are no dispute settlement provisions for
SPS provision. Is that a concern for you given the
importance that you placed on that, and we understand
for meat in particular?
Yeah. So, I think there's a number of other trade
agreements where the dispute settlement doesn't apply to the
SPS chapter,
and we're fairly confident that
the bilateral mechanisms that
the SPS chapter
produces to have those competent authority to competent authority
conversations
should be sufficient to
resolve some of these non-tariff barriers.
Which are those other trade agreements?
Top of my headSo dispute
mechanism doesn't apply in the SPS chapter
to, I think, RCEP,
and probably
CPTPP. I'd have to come back to you on the specifics.
Thank you.
But I know not all agreements have
dispute mechanism for SPS chapters.
Thank you. Okay, next question, Tim Costley.
Thank you, and appreciate the numbers on wool versus
sheep meat. So what does the future look like? That's where it is today.
What does it look like because of this deal?
Is it improving? Is it better? And are you better with the deal or without it?
We're definitely better with the deal than without it.
So, one of the biggest barriers was that for sheep
meat exports, which is your high-value export,
was that 33% or is that 33% tariff.
It just makes it commercially impossible to
trade.
The other thing is that it gives us opportunities for trade in
products like pet food for
retail sale, which we know that there is a growing demand among
particularly the middle class for really high-quality pet
food.
And also in the trade around blood
products and inputs into pharmaceuticals.
We know that India has a growing or has ambition to be
the
pharmaceutical
manufacturer in the world. And
our disease-free status in particular means that the
products that are going into those pharmaceutical products
will be in high demand as well.
Thank you.
Benita Walters.
Thank you, and thank you for your submission.
A few people have raised concerns about the investment provisions and
what might happen in 15 years' time.
Just curious about your perspective in terms of whether that poses a risk
or what your expectation is in terms of what might happen at
that 15-year time period.
Yeah. So our understanding, based on conversations with government
officials, is that the investment provisions are based on facilitation or
promotion as opposed to an actual spend.
And best endeavors provisions are common in all trade agreements.
We saw those in the UK, the EU, FTA as well.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you both for your time this morning. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Okay. We come now to Howie Smith.
Good morning.
Good morning, Howie. We have a different surname for you, but
presumably you're the same submitter.
Howie Aubin-Goen.
Okay.
We had the-
Good morning
... submission under Howie Smith.
Okay.
Was that you?
May have been a mix-up on the typing, but I'm here to give my
submission this morning.
Okay. We do need to be clear if we're hearing from Howie Smith, though.
Yes.
Howie Smith. Howie Aubin-Goen Smith is the full name.
Thank you.
All right. We have five minutes set down for you. Over to you.
Excellent. Thank you.
I rise today to strongly oppose the New Zealand India Free Trade Agreement.
We're told by proponents of this deal it represents a once in a generation
opportunity. We're told it will expand our markets, lift our
GDP, and secure our economic future.
But when you strip away the polished corporate talking points and examine the raw
structural mechanics of this agreement, a vastly
different and deeply concerning reality emerges.
This agreement is not about true freedom.
It is another brick being laid in a multi-generational control grid, a
system that systematically trades away our national sovereignty, dilutes social
cohesion, and traps New Zealanders inside a hyper-regulated,
hyper-financialized economic zone. Mr.
Chairman, we must address the immigration
implications built directly into the text of this treaty.
This deal creates an immediate locked-in mechanism for thousands of expedited
work visas. Why are we doing this?
It is to mask a structural mathematical emergency.
The Western economic model, heavily burdened by sovereign debt
left over from the pandemic response, treats our nation like a demographic
pyramid scheme.
Having fueled record
inflation through unprecedented government spending, governments now look to
rapid mass migration as a quick fix
to artificially inflate the GDP number.
While the rising GDP number looks impressive on a government spreadsheet, the
GDP cabinet, the actual standard of living, housing availability, and
buying power of the average New Zealander is in sharp decline.
This influx serves corporate interests by suppressing wages and
eroding the collective bargaining power of local workers.
We are trading the economic stability of our people to prop up a corporate
bottom line. Furthermore, Mr. Chairman, this rapid social engineering
actively fractures the high-trust society that New Zealanders have
historically fought to build. A functioning democracy
requires deep social cohesion, shared values, mutual trust,
and strong local communities. When you rapidly
alter the demographic landscape of a nation without breathing room for natural
integration, community trust breaks down.
Neighbors stop knowing neighbors.
A fractured low-trust society is incredibly
easy for a centralized bureaucracy to manage.
When a population is divided horizontally, fighting amongst themselves over
straining infrastructure, healthcare, and housing, they lack the unified strength
to look vertically and hold the political and corporate elite
accountable.We've seen this pattern across the Western world.
Governments mismanage economic and border policies until a predictable
crisis occurs, and then the state steps in with the very solution it wanted to
implement all along. They will use this chaos to justify a
hyper-control grid. Digital identity tracking, increased
financial surveillance, and aggressive enforcement of internet regulations
under the guise of managing public safety and social harmony. But Mr.
Chairman, the true apex of this control grid is the push towards a programmable
currency. Proponents will argue that the digital trade and financial
chapters of this agreement are merely about economic efficiency.
But in reality, and make no mistake, agreements that lock us into global
digital standards lay the precise legal and technological
foundations for a central bank digital currency.
This is not about the convenience of digital payments.
This is about transforming money from a medium of economic
exchange to a conditional permission-based system.
When the state controls a programmable currency, they gain
unprecedented power to orchestrate serious institutional abuse.
They can program your money with an expiry date for spending.
They can geo-fence your digital wallet, so it only functions within a small radius
of your home during a mandate. They can instantly block your ability to buy fuel,
meat, or even travel if you exceed an arbitrary quota.
And they can freeze your access to your own hard-earned wealth with a single line
of code, bypassing due process and the courts entirely.
By tying New Zealand into a hyper-centralized global framework, we're leaving the
door wide open for financial weaponization against our own citizens.
We must protect the absolute anonymity of physical
cash, and we must reject any agreement which inches
us closer to a system where survival requires political
permission. Mr. Chairman, this FTA binds New Zealand tighter
to a global system that demands we surrender our independent choices.
It treats our citizens like interchangeable economic units rather than humans
with a unique heritage, culture, and homeland. There is an alternative.
True resilience does not come from signing away our laws and borders to an
international consensus. True security lies in decoupling from this
hyper-centralized grid. It lies in fostering local
self-reliance, protecting our domestic workforce, and maintaining a high-trust,
decentralized society where the state is forced to leave its citizens alone.
Please stand up for a future where New Zealand remains a sovereign home, not an
outsourced, tracked, and financialized economic zone.
All right.
I urge-
Thank you very much for your time this morning. We appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are over time now. Thank you.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay. Members, we are scheduled for a break, but I believe we
have Martin Frauenstein
online who is due to be after the break.
We are running a little ahead of schedule due to some submitters not being present.
So I think we'll just move straight to Martin, if we're happy with that, given
he's already present.
All right. Thank you.
Good morning, Martin.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent.
Good morning, committee members.
Hello again.
Um-
Straight over to you.
I'm speaking to you from the West Island,
and
my concern
is
slightly different to what you've heard
thus far.
I came to New Zealand as an immigrant in '96.
And the New Zealand that I came to in '96 and the New Zealand
that
I'm a citizen of right now are two different places.
I would just like to--
I'm not sure if this is going to be allowed, but I'd like to share
screen. Is this possible?
I'm not sure if we have that function-
Well-
... enabled
...
I'll wait until...
Is this possible now?
Just checking with the team. Can we enable
screen sharing for Martin?
You should be able to now, Martin.
Hopefully, I will get there.
I'll just share this entire thing.
So are you seeing something at the moment?
No, it hasn't come up.
I'll leave that and-
Yes, perhaps it might be best just-
I'd like you to-
... carry on with the remaining time
... I'll speak to that.
The New Zealand
coat of arms has at the apex of
that coat of arms,
the
St Edward.
It also has,
at the top of that crown, it has a cross.
It is a Christian cross.
This free trade agreement
is going to-- That crown also
reflects a heritage or a connection to
the
UK monarchySo that
monarchy and UK have experienced the
immigration
of Muslim and Hindu and Asian
people that has changed the social
fabric of the UK.
This same free trade agreement is about to do the same thing.
I believe that we need to look to the UK to see what the effect
is or has been of that migration and ask
the question: Does this free trade agreement
facilitate additional change
or does it in actual fact protect us from any further
social changes that have a negative effect?
And if you can't answer the question, then I'd like you to
look at the people that are coming into New Zealand are going
to live where?
Right now, New Zealand has a housing crisis where you have a
number of people or increasing number of people living in
cars.
In my attempt to retire, I
am a volunteer that assists
immigrants to the country
and also assists people that have come here,
usurping the immigration
laws that we actually have right now, where people come in as
a pregnant person,
and because the child is in actual fact born here, they
become citizens.
They come to the country not being able to communicate
properly in English.
And this free trade agreement, I feel, is focusing
on
a few financial gains, but
not looking at the cost of the people that are coming into the country and
the effect on our society.
We are looking at a government situation
where rates are rising and forced to
make
decisions because rate increases
are not in actual fact addressed in any way.
So what I'm asking
is, is this free trade agreement and the
values
that it purports to
bring to New Zealand,
are those balanced off by the cost of
those immigrants and the stresses that those costs are
placing on local people, on local
communities?
And if so,
I don't see anything in this agreement that in actual fact balances that.
All that I see is, as the
previous presenter actually mentioned, a control
mechanism and a commitment to things of
taking
the
investment that New Zealand side of the country
versus placing that same money
to benefit the New Zealand citizens that we have.
All right.
So my question-
We are just running over time now
Mr. Chairman, unfortunately, I'm out of time.
Yes, no problem. Thank you very much for your contribution this morning.
Appreciate that.
Okay, members, we might just jump into private session
while we still have a few minutes ahead of us and deal with some other items of
business. Thank you